Load-Aware Hierarchical Information-centric
Routing for Large-scale LEO Satellite Networks
Fei Yan∗ , Zhiyuan Wang∗†¶ , Shan Zhang∗†§ , Qingkai Meng‡ , and Hongbin Luo∗†§
∗ School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
† Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
‡ Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing, China
§ State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, Beijing, China

2024 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC) | 979-8-3503-0358-2/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/WCNC57260.2024.10570792

¶ State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beijing, China

Email: {yanfeienter, zhiyuanwang, zhangshan18, mengqingkai, luohb}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract—The emerging large-scale low earth orbit (LEO)
constellation is expected to provide global Internet services.
However, large-scale satellite networks meet the challenges of
topology dynamics and continuous traffic variation. This paper
proposes LoHi, a Load-aware Hierarchical Information-centric
(LoHi) Routing Protocol based on constellation Partitioning and
logic path identifier (PID), to address the above challenges.
Specifically, LoHi divides a constellation into satellite groups
and only keeps track of the inter-satellite link (ISL) state within
each group instead of the entire constellation, stabilizing global
routing. Moreover, LoHi adopts the PID to denote the logic
connectivity of adjacent satellite groups, which corresponds to
multiple physical ISLs. Accordingly, the hierarchical multipath
routing is calculated based on the inner-group and inter-group
connectivity information. Furthermore, LoHi adjusts forwarding
decisions according to the real-time traffic load on the ISL and
group-level inter-group paths to reduce packet drop and queuing
delay in a hierarchical pattern. Packet-level experiment results
show that LoHi achieves a higher packet delivery ratio than the
state-of-the-art mechanisms (up to 132.12%).
Index Terms—Satellite networks, routing protocol, logic path
identifier, load balance.

I. I NTRODUCTION
A. Background & Motivation
Large-scale low earth orbit (LEO) satellite networks are
becoming a vital communication infrastructure that provides
low-latency and broadband Internet services [1]. The LEO
constellations deployed by SpaceX and OneWeb are promising
to support many delay-sensitive Internet applications, e.g.,
live video streaming, remote sensing, and real-time communication. This goal requires reliable content delivery within
the LEO satellite constellation via the inter-satellite links
(ISLs) [2]. Therefore, it is crucial to develop an appropriate
intra-domain routing architecture and design a reliable routing
mechanism for content delivery in large-scale constellations.
The challenges of achieving reliable content delivery (i.e.,
high packet delivery ratio) in large-scale LEO constellations
are two-fold: 1) dynamic topology caused by intermittent ISLs;
2) unbalanced traffic distribution on the constellation. On the
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grants 62202021, 62225201, and 62271019, in part by the State Key
Laboratory of Software Development Environment under Grant SKLSDE2022ZX-18.

one hand, the regular and occasional ISL failure renders the
satellite network topology frequently change [3]. On the other
hand, the Geo-distributed population yields unbalanced traffic
from the global perspective, which leads to an unbalanced load
for large-scale satellite networks [4]–[6]. Overcoming these
challenges requires an appropriate routing architecture.
The classic IP-based (i.e., host-centric) routing architecture adopts an end-to-end communication model, which is
vulnerable to topology changes. Moreover, the end-to-end
communication model is also inefficient in distributing popular
contents (e.g., popular live video) due to redundant delivery
[7]. Hence, the classic IP-based routing architecture may not
be able to accommodate the large-scale satellite networks.
In contrast, information-centric network (ICN) routing architecture focuses on contents (instead of hosts). The named
contents can be cached and re-used for subsequent requests,
enabling reliable content sharing. However, the informationcentric routing architecture cannot accommodate the intermittent ISLs, since it follows stateful forwarding. This will lead
to a poor performance for the end-to-end traffic pattern.
The discussions above indicate that directly adopting existing terrestrial routing architectures in large-scale LEO satellite
networks is not feasible. Therefore, it is necessary to investigate the topology feature and customize a proper routing
architecture for this brand-new network circumstance. To this
end, this paper proposes a load-aware hierarchical routing architecture for large-scale LEO satellite networks by integrating
the advantages of IP-based and ICN-based routing paradigms.
B. Related Works
We review the literature closely related to our study in this
article. They include the routing mechanisms that deal with
satellite networks’ topology dynamics and load balance.
1) Routing mechanisms on dealing with topology dynamics:
Several studies integrate the topology control strategy (i.e.,
virtual topology method) with the link-state routing in satellite
networks to deal with the occasional ISL failure (e.g., [8], [9]).
For example, Pan et al. in [8] integrate the link-state detection
with the regular routing table updates to reduce the onboard
satellite memory. Moreover, some studies have explored topology management strategy (i.e., constellation partitioning) to

979-8-3503-0358-2/24/$31.00
©2024 Yang
IEEEMing Chiao Tung University. Downloaded on October 20,2024 at 13:34:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
Authorized
licensed use limited to: National

stabilize the global topology, yielding a hierarchical routing
pattern [10], [11]. For example, Zhang et al. in [10] leverage
the topology feature to divide the constellation into multiple
areas and restrict the ISL state change within the area to tackle
the strong topology dynamics.
2) Routing mechanisms for on-board load balance: The
above routing mechanisms could get relatively good results
when the network traffic is light. But their performance
will decrease as traffic increase. Accordingly, several studies
examine the problem of load balancing [4]–[6], [9], [12]. For
example, Taleb et al. in [4] consider the congestion status
among neighboring satellites when it selects the forwarding
ISL. Song et al. in [5] propose a traffic-light satellite routing
strategy to reduce packet drop and distribute traffic burdens
fairly based on the ISL congestion status. However, the above
routing mechanisms still suffer frequent routing updates, decreasing the content delivery performance under large-scale
constellations, especially when ISL failure occurs.
Different from the literature above, our study in this paper
will customize a proper load-aware routing architecture for
large-scale satellite networks by integrating the benefits of IPbased and ICN-based routing paradigm.
C. Main Results and Key Contributions
This paper presents a Load-aware Hierarchical Informationcentric (LoHi) Routing Protocol for achieving reliable content
delivery in large-scale LEO satellite networks. Our main
results and key contributions are as follows:
• Propose a hierarchical information-centric routing architecture LoHi, enabling harness advantages of hostcentric and information-centric routing: LoHi reduces
the topology dynamics by partitioning the constellation
into several satellite groups, and each LoHi satellite only
keeps track of the ISL state within each satellite group.
Moreover, LoHi identifies the logic path of adjacent
satellite groups, and adopts a hierarchical routing scheme
(based on in-packet path identifiers).
• Design a load-aware hierarchical content retrieval pattern: LoHi introduces a load-aware hierarchical content
retrieval scheme, releasing the advantages of host-centric
and information-centric routing. Specifically, LoHi adopts
a pull-based inter-group content retrieval by sending
GET packets (information-centric) that record the intergroup PID of traversed satellite groups. Moreover, LoHi
employs an push-based (host-centric) inner-group routing
based on the in-packet PID. Particularly, LoHi can adjust
forwarding decision according to the real-time traffic load
on inter-group logic path and ISLs (i.e., select a properly
next-group or next-hop satellite).
• Packet-level performance evaluation: We evaluate the
performance of our proposed LoHi under the OneWeb
constellation. Results show that LoHi outperforms the
state-of-the-art routing mechanisms up to 132.12% in
terms of packet delivery ratio.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II elaborates the key idea of LoHi. Section III presents

Direction of
movement

Si,j's interfaces and queues:
Si,j+1

Si-1,j
Seam

Si,j+1

Si+1,j

if1

Si-1,j

Si+1,j+1

if4
if2

Si,j

Si,j
if3

Si,j-1

Si,j-1
Queue of ISL
Direction

Interplane ISL

Intraplane ISL

Fig. 1. Illustration of polar constellation and ISL’s queue.

the design of LoHi in details. Section IV evaluates the performance of LoHi. Section V concludes this paper.
II. L O H I ROUTING A RCHITECTURE
A. Satellite Network Model
We consider a polar orbit constellation with N orbital planes
and M satellites on each plane. The satellites are orbiting at the
same altitude. Let {Si,1 , Si,2 , ..., Si,M } denote the satellites on
the i-th plane. The satellites in the same orbit plane are spaced
uniformly, i.e., the angular distance between two adjacent
satellites is ω = 2π/M . Overall, satellite networks exhibit a
deterministic neighbour relationship. Moreover, each satellite
has at most four neighbors, which are connected via ISL
(e.g., laser ISLs). As shown in Fig. 1, the satellite Si,j has
four neighbors {Si−1,j , Si,j−1 , Si,j+1 , Si+1,j }. Furthermore,
we suppose that there is a queue for each interface to buffer
pending forwarding packets. As shown in Fig. 1, the satellite
S1,5 has four queues.
B. Key Idea of LoHi
LoHi aims to develop a routing mechanism that considers
routing stabilization and load balance for satellite networks.
1) Topology Management: In terms of topology management, our proposed LoHi achieves the global topology stability
via the following two approaches:
• Constellation Partition: We divide the constellation
into multiple satellite groups, and the ISL state will
be only disseminated within the corresponding group.
Specifically, each group consists of p orbital planes and s
satellites on each orbital plane. The satellite groups have
deterministic neighbor relations. The neighbor groups are
mutually connected by p intra-orbit ISLs or s inter-orbit
ISLs. In practice, the group scale (p, s) could be flexible,
which might be determined by the network operator.
• Logic Connection: We introduce the path identifier (PID)
to represent the logic path between adjacent groups.
These PIDs will be used in the inter-group content request
and data delivery. Generally, they will not be advertised
throughout the network and will be known only by
the two adjacent groups. Moreover, a PID is associated
with multiple physical ISLs, which is used to carry out
multipath inter-group routing and improve the stability of
the inter-group content forwarding.

Authorized licensed use limited to: National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University. Downloaded on October 20,2024 at 13:34:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

S2,2's inter-group routing table:
Content
Next-hop
Path
Name
Group
Identifier
Group 2
PID1
C1
Group 3
PID2
GET:

Cost
2
2

Group 1
f1
(I.1)

f3

S2,1 (D.3) S3,1 (D.3) S4,1
S3,2
PID1 S
(I.2)

f2

(I.2)
S4,3

S3,3

S2,3
S3,5

(I.1) C1 User1 PID0

S5,4
S4,5

S2,5
(I.2) C1 User1 PID0 PID1
(I.3) C1 User1 PID0 PID1 PID3

(I.4) C1 User1 PID0 PID1 PID3 PID5

Group 3

S3,6

S4,6

User1

S4,2's inner-group routing table:
Destination
NID

Content
Name

S5,3

C2, C3

Next-hop
NID
S5,2
S4,3

Cost
3
2

S6,4

S5,5
S5,6

(D.1) PID3 PID1 PID0 User1 C1 data

Group 4
PID5

PID0
GS0
AS0

Group 2

4,2

C1

AS1

f1
GS1

(D.2) PID1 PID0 User C1 data
DATA:

(D.3) PID0 User1 C1 data

Fig. 2. Illustration of how LoHi routing mechanism works.

Fig. 2 plots a simple scenario with four satellite groups, each
of which consists of nine satellites. Note that PID0 identifies
the path between Group 1 and terrestrial AS0.
2) Hierarchical Multipath Routing Calculation: LoHi decouples inner-group routing and inter-group routing to construct a hierarchical multipath routing mechanism by leveraging the constellation partitioning and the PID.
Inner-group routing: Each LoHi node detects the ISL
state via the hello mechanism and synchronizes the innergroup ISL State Advertisement (LSA) within corresponding groups rather than the entire network. This yields less
protocol overhead and improves the routing stability.
• Inter-group routing: The inter-group routing will construct a group-level topology and generate an inter-group
routing table on each management satellite. Such an intergroup routing table will be used for guiding the grouplevel content retrieval in a pulling manner (like NDN).

•

3) Hierarchical Load-aware Packet Forwarding Adjustment: LoHi is information-centric and assigns each content
a unique name with a hierarchical structure. According to
the content name, LoHi adopts a hierarchical pull-based intergroup and push-based inner-group routing to fetch the desired
content. Moreover, LoHi adjusts the forwarding decision in a
hierarchical pattern with the following two aspects:
Inter-group packet forwarding: Note that the management satellite will append the PID on the GET packet
(i.e., request) to indicate the next-hop group towards the
content provider. The inter-group traffic can be estimated
in the management satellite by collecting content metadata (e.g., content size) in each GET packet. As a result,
the management satellite can adjust the forwarding decision, i.e., next-hop group. Thus, we could achieve loadaware multipath inter-group routing by properly sending
GET packets along different next group. Accordingly, the
DATA will be delivered back to the user following the
reversed group-level path of forwarding the GET packet.
• Inner-group packet forwarding: In LoHi, the packets
(i.e., GET/DATA) will be pushed to a proper destination
within the group based on the inner-group routing and
real-time ISL’s queuing status. Particularly, the DATA
packets will be forwarded within the group based on the
in-packet PID and real-time ISL’s queuing status.
•

C. An Illustrative Example
We show how LoHi works with the help of Fig. 2. Specifically, a User1 in the autonomous system AS0 requests the
content C1 provided by a Provider in AS1 via the satellite
network. The content fetch under LoHi follows two stages.
GET Packet Forwarding: The red arrows in Fig. 2 represent the GET packet forwarding in the constellation. The
User1 in AS0 desires to obtain the content C1 , thus it issues
a GET packet containing the name of C1 . The ground station
(i.e., GS0 ) in AS0 will encode PID0 into the GET packet and
forward the modified GET packet to the coverage satellite
S1,1 . As illustrated by the red arrow (I.1) in Fig. 2, when S1,1
receives the GET packet, it will make a forwarding decision (to
the management satellite S2,2 of Group 1 based on its innergroup routing table and ISLs’ load status. Then, S2,2 will
select a proper next group (i.e., Group 2) according to the
inter-group routing table (as shown in Fig. 2) and estimated
inter-group traffic status. Then, S2,2 appends PID1 to the end
of the GET packet and forwards it to one of the egress border
satellites (i.e., S3,2 ), as illustrated by arrow (I.2). Similarly,
as shown by arrows (I.3) and (I.4) in Fig. 2, the GET packet
is forwarded to the satellite S6,5 , which covers GS1 in AS1 .
While the Provider in AS1 receives the GET packet, it then
delivers the DATA packet to User1 in the following procedure.
DATA Packet Forwarding: The blue arrows in Fig. 2
represent the DATA packet forwarding process based on the
PID sequence recorded in the GET packet. Specifically, the
Provider encodes the obtained PID sequence of the GET
packet into the DATA packet. Then, the DATA packet will be
forwarded to S6,5 via GS1 . As shown by the blue arrow (D.1)
in Fig. 2, S6,5 forwards the DATA packet to the nearest border
satellite S6,4 associated with PID3. If one of the ISLs with a
heavy load in S5,3 , it adjusts its forwarding decision based on
the inner-group routing table (as shown in Fig. 2) and ISLs’
load status. Similarly, the satellites in Group 2 will forward
the DATA packet based on the encoded PID1 and adjusted
forwarding decision, as illustrated by arrow (D.2) in Fig. 2. In
particular, if the inter-group ISL failure occurs (i.e., the black
cross among border satellites S3,3 and S4,3 ), S4,3 is capable
of forwarding the DATA packet to Group 1 via an alternative
inter-group ISL since each PID is associated with multiple
physical ISLs. Finally, when the DATA packet reaches Group
1, the border satellite S1,1 will forward the DATA packet to

Authorized licensed use limited to: National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University. Downloaded on October 20,2024 at 13:34:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the GS0 via the logic path PID0.
So far, we have introduced our key ideas of LoHi. Next, the
LoHi routing algorithm is presented in detail.

Group 1
S1,2
S2,3

III. L O H I ROUTING A LGORITHM
In this section, we first introduce how to build a hierarchical multipath routing. Then, we describe how LoHi adjusts
forwarding decision based on real-time conditions.

Group 2

PID1

Group 1
S3,1
S1,2 S2,2 S3,2
S3,3
S2,3
S2,1

S2,2 S3,2

S4,2

S5,2

S3,3

S4,3

S5,3

(a) Physical link change

Group 2

PID1
S4,1
S4,2

S5,1
S5,2

S4,3

S5,3

S6,2

(b) Inter-group logical path change

Fig. 3. Illustration of physical ISL and inter-group logical connection change.

Inner-group and Inter-group LSA synchronization:
When the LoHi satellite receives an inner-group LSA,
it will update its inner-group LSDB and disseminate the
LSA to adjacent satellites within the group. Similarly,
the inter-group LSA will be announced within the corresponding two groups. Particularly, each inner-group
node will update the mapping of PID and the border
satellite after receiving the inter-group LSA. For example,
as shown in Fig. 3(b), the border satellite S3,3 and S4,3
will create an inter-group LSA for the inter-group ISL
failure and disseminate the LSA with the corresponding
groups (denoted by blue arrows). Such an LSA announce
manner can efficiently propagate link state changes within
the satellite group and yield a small protocol overhead,
improving global routing stability.
• Logic inter-group path LSA synchronization: When
the logic inter-group path change is detected, it will be
advertised to the management satellite of each group, as
illustrated by orange arrows in Fig. 3(b). This enables the
management satellite to maintain up-to-date information
on the logic inter-group path and calculate the inter-group
routing table to guide packet forwarding.
Moreover, each satellite in a group maintains a mapping from
the PID to the border satellites, which incurs little overhead.
4) Multipath Routing Calculation: LoHi node uses the
collected adjacency information (i.e., inner-group LSA or logic
inter-group path LSA) to construct a hierarchical multipath
routing. Specifically, each inner-group node uses the collected
inner-group LSA in the corresponding LSDB to build an innergroup routing table. Note that an extension of the shortest
path first algorithm is employed to calculate the inner-group
multipath routing. More specifically, the satellite first gets the
number of links, which is the number of calculation iterations.
Then, the satellite selects one of the links to calculate the cost
to reach every inner-group satellite using Dijikstra’s algorithm.
This process is repeated for every available ISL. Note that the
satellite also ranks the next hops for each satellite based on
their respective cost. A similar group-level inter-group routing
calculation is conducted.
Next, we present how the LoHi adjusts the forwarding
direction based on the real-time traffic status.
•

A. Hierarchical Multipath Routing Calculation
We detailed elaborate the hierarchical multipath routing
mechanism based on the constellation partitioning as follows.
1) Detection of Physical Link Status: To deal with links
dynamics in the context of rapidly moving satellites, LoHi
dynamically adopts the Hello mechanism to detect the link
state (i.e., link failure and recovery).
• Inner-group link state detection: In our proposed LoHi
routing mechanism, the satellite and ground-station (GS)
will detect the connectivity of the ISL and groundsatellite link (GSL) status based on a hello protocol.
Therefore, LoHi satellites can keep the ISL and GSL
connectivity information up-to-date. When an inner-group
link state change is detected, the LoHi satellite will
initiate an inner-group LSA and announce the inner-group
LSA with the group. For example, as shown in Fig. 3(a),
S1,2 and S2,2 will create an inner-group LSA for the ISL
failure (denoted by the black cross), and disseminate the
LSA within the group (denoted by the dash green arrows).
• Inter-group link state detection: Similarly, the intergroup link changes will trigger the LoHi satellite (i.e.,
border satellite) to generate an inter-group LSA, which
contains the adjacent group ID of the neighboring satellite. For example, as shown in Fig. 3(a), the LoHi satellite
S3,3 and S4,3 will create an inter-group LSA for the
inter-group ISL failure (denoted by the red cross), and
disseminate the LSA with the corresponding groups.
2) Detection of Logic Inter-group Path Status: The management satellite will collect the connection relationship
among the adjacent groups via the inter-group LSA (generated
by border satellites) to maintain the logical connectivity of
the inter-group. When all of the physical links between two
groups are disrupted simultaneously, the logical relationship
between two adjacent groups changes. Accordingly, the associate management satellites will create an inter-group path
LSA. For instance, as shown in Fig. 3(b), when the ISLs among
Group 1 and Group 2 are corrupted, border satellites S3,1 ,
S3,2 , S3,3 , S4,1 , S4,2 , and S4,3 will generate an inter-group
LSA with affiliated groups, respectively. Accordingly, when
management satellites (i.e., S2,2 and S5,2 ) detect the logic intergroup path failure, they will initiate an inter-group path LSA
and disseminate it to adjacent groups.
3) Announcement of Physical ISL and Logic Inter-group
Path Status: Once an LSA (including inner-group LSA, intergroup LSA, or logic inter-group path LSA) is received, it will
be announced within the corresponding groups. Specifically,

B. Real-time Packet Forwarding Decision
Based on the above hierarchical multipath routing, LoHi is
capable of adjusting the forwarding direction according to the
real-time traffic load in a hierarchical pattern.
1) Inner-group Forwarding Path Rating: The inner-group
forwarding path will consider the propagation and queuing

Authorized licensed use limited to: National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University. Downloaded on October 20,2024 at 13:34:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Satellite gro
Managemen
Inner-grou
Inter-group
ISL failure

delays to find an appropriate path. In particular, the queuing
delay can be calculated based on the output interface’s realtime queue length, as shown in Fig. 1. To calculate the path
rating, we will calculate the ISL cost of each interface in
satellite Si,j . Specifically, at time t, the instant ISL cost of
interface k in Si,j is defined as

Algorithm 1: Hierarchical Load-balancing Forwarding
Output: Interface intf
/* Process in Management Satellite */
1 if GET packet then
2
Lookup Inter-group content routing table
3
Select the next Group ID with minimal inter-group
logic path cost Tga to the destination Group
LCk (t) = Tpk (t) + Tqk (t) + TSk (t),
(1)
4
Encode the PID associated with next Group ID
where, Tpk (t) denotes the one-way propagation delay among
into the GET packet
the adjacent satellite. Tqk (t) denotes a predicted queuing delay 5
Send the Get packet to next group g
in ISL k at time t, and it is computed as follows:
6
Update traffic matrix Ga and logic path cost Tga
PK
in the Inter-group content routing table
Lk
(2)
Tqk (t) = k=1 ,
/
Process
in Forwarding Satellite */
*
BW
7 Lookup Inner-group routing table
PK
where,
k=1 Lk denotes the current queue size. BW is the
8 Calculate available routes cost LCk to the destination
bandwidth of an ISL. Moreover, TSk denotes routing detour 9 Select the intf with minimal cost LC
k
k
for the packet delivery with an exponentially distributed.
10 Send the packet to the output interface intfk
Based on the above design, a satellite will rate the multiple
outgoing paths for forwarding decision. Thus, the satellite will
select the least-cost ISL to forward GET or DATA packet.
2) Inter-group Forwarding Path Rating via estimating Logic (to simulate the satellite mobility), the network module (to
Path Loading: Recall that in our proposed LoHi, the group- simulate the protocol stacks), and the traffic generator module
level traffic loads can be estimated (i.e., traffic matrix Ga ) (to simulate traffic patterns). Moreover, we implement LoHi
in the management satellite since the GET will be sent to and conduct extensive packet-level experiments to demonstrate
it for querying the next forwarding group. Accordingly, the the performance of LoHi and compare it with the stat-of-thepredicted number of retrieved DATA packets Ng could be art methods (i.e., NLSR [13], NDN-RFA [14], and LPIH [11]).
In our simulation, we consider the OneWeb constellation,
calculated. This motivates us to calculate the expected interwhich
is a polar-orbit constellation with inclination 87.9°. It
group path cost at the group level. Let Tg denote the interconsists
720 satellites that fly along 18 orbital planes (i.e.,
group path cost for next-group forwarding, which is computed
40
satellites
on each orbit plane). Moreover, we suppose that
as follows:
Ng × Lavg
each
satellite
has at most four ISLs (i.e., intra-plane ISLs
,
(3)
Tg =
Alinks × BW
and inter-plane ISLs). The payload of each DATA packet is 1
where, Lavg is the length of the packet. Moreover, Alinks is the KB. For simulation convenience, we consider 10 Mbps for all
number of available ISLs among the adjacent satellite group. links (i.e., ISL and GSL). Drop-Tail-based buffer of each link
equals 500 packets. Furthermore, we simulate occasional ISL
3) Hierarchical Load-balancing Forwarding Algorithm:
Algorithm 1 presents the major procedure of forwarding failures by randomly generating the failure events according
to a Poisson process with a specific rate λ. Each failed ISL
decisions in LoHi. It mainly consists of two key parts:
will recover after τ seconds.
• Inter-group path selection in management satellite:
Lines 1-6 present the progress of packet forwarding A. Performance Under Stable Network Traffic Flows
when the management satellite receives a GET packet.
We evaluate the packet delivery performance achieved by
Specifically, the management satellite will select the leastNLSR, NDN-RFA, LPIH, and LoHi under the OneWeb conloaded inter-group logic path to forward the GET packet
stellation. Specifically, the 6 × 10 grouping scheme of LPIH
and append the associated PID (i.e., based on the PID to
and LoHi is adopted, i.e., 12 groups with 60 satellites per
determine the next group).
group. We focus on the average packet delivery ratio (PDR)
• Inner-group ISL selection: Lines 7-10 present how a
with constant request rates (i.e., stable network traffic flows)
LoHi satellite processes the received packets (GET and
under an end-to-end traffic pattern. Now, we explore how the
DATA). Specifically, the pre-calculated inner-group routtraffic load and ISL failure rate affect the content delivery
ing table will be used to provide a rough direction (i.e.,
performance of the LoHi routing mechanism.
Line 7). Further, the forwarding adjustment is carried out
Impact of Traffic Loads: Fig. 4 shows the results with
to help make the best decision (i.e., Lines 8-10).
different traffic loads1 under point-to-point content delivery
pattern. The horizontal axis represents traffic loads. From Fig.
IV. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATIONS
4, we find that LoHi outperforms the state-of-the-art mechaTo simulate the satellite network and conduct packet-level
nisms, which implies that LoHi can accommodate the heavier
experiments, we develop a satellite network simulation platform based on OMNeT++. This simulation platform consists
1 The traffic load is characterized by the number of requests per second in
of three key modules, including the constellation module our experiments (i.e., 500 packets per second).

Authorized licensed use limited to: National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University. Downloaded on October 20,2024 at 13:34:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

40
20

LoHi
NDN-RFA
NLSR
LPIH

0
500 550 600 650 700 750 800

Requests Per Second

Fig. 4. Avg. PDR under different
traffic load without ISL failure

80
60
40

LoHi
NDN-RFA
LPIH
NLSR

20
0

0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20

800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0

ISL Failure Rate (%)

(a) Avg. packet delivery ratio

LoHi
NDN-RFA
LPIH
NLSR

0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20

ISL Failure Rate (%)

(b) Avg. packet delay

Fig. 5. Impact of ISL failure rate on packet delivery performance

traffic load. Specifically, LoHi achieves 7.49%, 59.56%, and
57.94% higher average PDR than NDN-RFA, NLSR, and
LPIH, respectively. This is because the LoHi can adjust
forwarding decisions based on the real-time traffic load on
each ISL to avoid transient queues and packet drops.
Impact of ISL Failure Rates: We evaluate whether our
proposed LoHi routing mechanism performs well in the largescale satellite network with unreliable ISLs. Fig. 5 shows the
results with different ISL failure rates (i.e., {0, 1, ..., 20}).
Particularly, we only consider the successful packet delivery
in terms of packet delay.
Fig. 5(a) shows that as the ISL failure rate increases, the
average PDR achieved by the above mechanisms decreases.
Nevertheless, the performance of LoHi still outperforms the
state-of-the-art mechanisms. More specifically, the average
PDR of LoHi is higher than that of NDN-RFA, NLSR, and
LPIH, up to 39.14%, 132.12%, and 32.22%, respectively. The
reasons are two-fold. First, LoHi can mitigate the topology
dynamics of satellite networks based on PID, improving packet
forwarding reliability. Second, the LoHi can adjust packet
forwarding decisions based on the real-time traffic load on
ISLs to reduce the packet drop. As for packet delay, Fig. 5(b)
shows that the packet delay of the above mechanisms increases
as the ISL failure rate. This is because the traffic shift occurs
when ISL fails, resulting in packet queues.
B. Performance Under Burst Network Traffic
Now, we compare LoHi and NDN-RFA (i.e., NDN-based
load balance method) to evaluate their performance in dealing
with burst traffic. Fig. 6 shows the average throughput with
shaded areas, indicating the range of fluctuations when one
of the traffic flows generates a burst of content requests.
Particularly, the traffic burst occurs at time 220s.
By comparing the red solid and green dashed lines in Fig.
6, we can see that LoHi achieves a higher average throughput
than that of NDN-RFA (up to 19.2%). Moreover, from Fig.
6, we find that LoHi has a slight variation in throughput
performance, implying LoHi achieves a stable throughput than
NDN-RFA. This is because LoHi can adjust the forwarding
decision based on the real-time ISLs’ load.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented the design of the Hierarchical
Load Balanced Routing (LoHi) for large-scale LEO satellite

Avg. Throughput (Mbps)

60

100

Packet Delay (ms)

80

Packet Delivery Ratio (%)

Packet Delivery Ratio (%)

100

11

LoHi

10
9

NDN-RFA
220s

8
7
6
5
210 215 220 225 230 235 240 245 250

Simulation Time (Second)

Fig. 6. Performance of LoHi and NDN-RFA
under burst network traffic flows

networks. We also evaluate the content delivery performance
of LoHi in terms of point-to-point content delivery ratio and
instantaneous throughput by extensive packet-level experiments. Our results indicate that the LoHi accommodates the
heavier traffic load. Moreover, our method outperforms the
state-of-the-art mechanisms in terms of instantaneous throughput under the bursty nature of network traffic. In the future, we
will further improve LoHi by considering the special demands
on content delivery delay or bandwidth.
R EFERENCES
[1] M. Handley, “Delay is not an option: Low latency routing in space,” in
Proc. 17th ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in Net., Nov. 2018, pp. 85–91.
[2] H. Zhang, Z. Wang, S. Zhang, Q. Meng, and H. Luo., “Optimizing
link-identified forwarding framework in leo satellite networks,” in Proc.
WiOpt 2023, Aug. 2023, pp. 1–8.
[3] E. Ekici, I. Akyildiz, and M. Bender, “A distributed routing algorithm
for datagram traffic in leo satellite networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw.,
vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 137–147, 2001.
[4] T. Taleb, D. Mashimo, A. Jamalipour, N. Kato, and Y. Nemoto, “Explicit
load balancing technique for ngeo satellite ip networks with on-board
processing capabilities,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 17, no. 1, pp.
281–293, 2009.
[5] G. Song, M. Chao, B. Yang, and Y. Zheng, “TLR: A traffic-light-based
intelligent routing strategy for NGEO satellite IP networks,” IEEE Trans.
Wirel. Commun., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 3380–3393, 2014.
[6] Y. Yuan, L. Lei, T. X. Vu, S. Fowler, and S. Chatzinotas, “Efficient
resource scheduling and optimization for over-loaded leo-terrestrial
networks,” in Proc. IEEE ICC 2022, May, 2022, pp. 1052–1057.
[7] F. Yan, H. Luo, S. Zhang, Z. Wang, and P. Lian, “A comparative study
of ip-based and icn-based link-state routing protocols in LEO satellite
networks,” Peer Peer Netw. Appl., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 3032–3046, 2023.
[8] T. Pan, T. Huang, X. Li, Y. Chen, W. Xue, and Y. Liu, “Opspf: orbit
prediction shortest path first routing for resilient leo satellite networks,”
in Proc. IEEE ICC 2019, May 2019, pp. 1–6.
[9] Q. Shan, Z. Wang, S. Zhang, Q. Meng, and H. Luo, “Routing in leo
satellite networks: How many link-state updates do we need?” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. on Satell. Comput., Nov. 2023, pp. 1–6.
[10] X. Zhang, Y. Yang, M. Xu, and J. Luo, “Aser: Scalable distributed
routing protocol for leo satellite networks,” in Proc. IEEE 46th Conf.
on Local Comput. Netw., Oct. 2021, pp. 65–72.
[11] F. Yan, P. Lian, H. Luo, Z. Wang, and S. Zhang, “Logic path identified
hierarchical (lpih) routing for leo satellite network,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. on Satell. Comput., Nov. 2022, pp. 19–24.
[12] C. Han, W. Xiong, and R. Yu, “Load-balancing routing for leo satellite
network with distributed hops-based back-pressure strategy,” Sensors,
vol. 23, no. 24, pp. 1–22, 2023.
[13] A. K. M. M. Hoque, S. O. Amin, A. Alyyan, B. Zhang, L. Zhang, and
L. Wang, “NLSR: Named-data link state routing protocol,” in Proc. 3th
ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on Inf.-centric Netw., Aug. 2013, pp. 15–20.
[14] G. Carofiglio, M. Gallo, and L. Muscariello, “Optimal multipath congestion control and request forwarding in information-centric networks:
Protocol design and experimentation,” Comput. Networks, vol. 110, pp.
104–117, 2016.

Authorized licensed use limited to: National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University. Downloaded on October 20,2024 at 13:34:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

